# pootryEmotionalAnalysis
This project explores the relationship between poetic expression and reader interpretation by comparing the emotional undertones of poems with the sentiments and emotions expressed in reader feedback. Just as the saying goes, “you are what you eat,” this work asks whether our emotions as readers mirror the emotions embedded in the texts we consume.
To pursue this, I will be using the subreddit r/poetry-critic, which provides users with a platform to share their work as well as review the works of others. Reader comments and reviews will serve as a window into the audience’s emotional responses. This helps us analyze a sample of poetic pieces while also having their corresponding user feedback.
This project applies data mining and natural language processing (NLP) techniques to explore the emotional relationship between poetry and reader responses. Using the POCA dataset, a pre-trained transformer model such as j-hartmann/emotion-english-distilroberta-base will be fine-tuned to predict the emotional undertones of poems based on valence–arousal dimensions (describe emotions by their valence, or whether they are pleasant or unpleasant, and their arousal, or the level of intensity or energy they involve). Data from Reddit’s r/poetry_critics community will use the GoEmotions model to detect emotions in user comments. By mapping both poetic and reader emotions into a shared valence–arousal space, the project will analyze correlations between the emotional tone of poems and the reactions they evoke. Ultimately, the study aims to understand whether readers’ emotional responses reflect the emotional depth of the poetry they engage with, contributing to future developments in mood-aware literary analysis and recommendation systems.
